# KubeSwitcher Plugin: MCP

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This project is still work in progress and some errors as well as missing documentation are to be expected!

This is a plugin for the [kubeswitcher](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw) tool that allows to switch between clusters of an [openMCP](https://github.com/openmcp-project/openmcp-operator) landscape.

**This plugin is meant for operators of an openMCP landscape. It requires access to the landscape's internal clusters. If you are an end-user of an openMCP landscape, take a look at [this plugin](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw_mcpu) instead.**

## Installation

Note that this plugin works as a layer on top of the the [Gardener](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw_garden) and [kind](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw_kind) kubeswitcher plugins. It can only switch between clusters of an openMCP landscape if the corresponding plugin is also installed and configured correctly.

### Homebrew

```shell
brew tap diaphteiros/kubeswitcher
brew install kw_mcp
```

### Manual Build
Clone the repository (including the submodule) and run
```shell
task install
```

> [!NOTE]
> This project uses [task](https://taskfile.dev/) instead of `make`.

## Configuration

The plugin takes a small configuration in the kubeswitcher config. The configuration is required for the plugin to work properly.
```yaml
<...>
- name: mcp # under which kw subcommand this plugin will be reachable
  short: "Switch to mcp clusters" # short message for display in 'kw --help'
  binary: kw_mcp # name of or path to the plugin binary
  config:
    gardenPluginName: garden # name under which the Gardener kubeswitcher plugin is registered, defaults to 'garden'
    kindPluginName: kind # name under which the kind kubeswitcher plugin is registered, defaults to 'kind'
    defaultMCPVersion: v2 # whether to assume a v1 or v2 openMCP landscape if neither '--v1' nor '--v2' is specified for a command, defaults to 'v2'.
    landscapes: # multiple openMCP landscapes can be specified, each is assumed to have its own platform and onboarding cluster
      dev: # arbitrary identifier for the landscape
        onboarding: <...> # access to the onboarding cluster, see below
        platform: <...> # access to the platform cluster, see below
        additionalGardenerProjects: # see below for explanation
        - my-other-project
        platformClusterDefaultNamespace: openmcp-system # which namespace to set as default when switching to this landscape's platform cluster, defaults to 'default'
        workloadClusterPurpose: workload # the purpose used for workload clusters, defaults to 'workload' if not specified
      production: # arbitrary landscape identifier
        <...>
```

### Landscape Cluster Access

In order to interact with an openMCP landscape, access for both the landscape's platform and onboarding cluster needs to be configured. There are multiple ways to specify the access. The examples are always given for the onboarding cluster, the platform cluster has to be configured the same way.

#### Access: Gardener

```yaml
onboarding:
  gardener:
    garden: production
    project: mymcp
    shoot: onboarding
```

If a `gardener` key is specified, the [Gardener plugin](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw_garden) is used to access the cluster. These fields are required:
- `garden` specifies the name of the Gardener landscape to use.
  - Has to match the landscape's name in the [gardenctl](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl-v2) config.
- `project` specifies the project name of the shoot.
- `shoot` specifies the shoot name.

Basically, the above example would result in kubeswitcher executing `gardenctl target --garden production --project mymcp --shoot onboarding` to access the openMCP landscape's onboarding cluster.

#### Access: kind

```yaml
onboarding:
  kind:
    name: onboarding
```

For a local openMCP landscape running on kind clusters, only the name of the corresponding kind cluster needs to be specified. This requires the [kind plugin](https://github.com/Diaphteiros/kw_kind) to be available.

#### Access: static

```yaml
onboarding:
  path: /.kubeconfigs/onboarding-kcfg.yaml
```
or
```yaml
onboarding:
  inline: |
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Config
    <...>
```

It is also possible to use a kubeconfig for accessing the onboarding and/or platform cluster. It can be specified as a path or inline, although the former variant should be preferred.

### Additional Gardener Projects

The `additionalGardenerProjects` field that can be set for a landscape only has an effect on openMCP landscapes that use the [Gardener ClusterProvider](https://github.com/openmcp-project/cluster-provider-gardener) internally. Usually, kubeswitcher plugins are supposed to only evaluate the current state if it was generated by a call to the plugin itself. However, since the MCP plugin is special in that it does not actually implement some cluster switching logic but just serves as a topology-aware layer on top of other kubeswitcher plugins, it breaks with this rule: When a call to the MCP plugin is issued and the state (from the last kubeswitcher call) comes from one of the supported other plugins, the MCP plugin will try to figure out if the other plugin was used to switch to a cluster which belongs to one of the configured openMCP landscapes and, if successful, derive the state from that.

Let's do an example. If you have the following config
```yaml
    <...>
    landscapes:
      local-dev:
        onboarding:
          kind:
            name: localdev-onboarding
        platform:
          kind:
            name: localdev-platform
```
and want to switch to the project `foo`, workspace `bar`, controlplane `baz`, you would need to do something like this:
```shell
kw mcp target -l local-dev -p foo -w bar -c baz
```

If you switch to the landscape's onboarding cluster _using the kind plugin, not the MCP one_
```shell
kw kind localdev-onboarding
```
and then try to switch to the controlplane mentioned above, the MCP plugin should be able to recognize that you are on the `local-dev` landscape, allowing you to omit the `-l` argument
```shell
kw mcp target -p foo -w bar -c baz
```

> [!NOTE]
> This will always work if the MCP plugin itself was used to switch to any cluster belonging to the `local-dev` landscape before, e.g. via `kw mcp target -l local-dev`.

Since Gardener-based openMCP landscapes may span multiple Gardener projects, the `additionalGardenerProjects` field can be used to specify a list of Gardener projects which can be considered belonging to the respective openMCP landscape. Basically, this says 'If the state from the last kubeswitcher command belongs to the Gardener plugin and the project name is one of these, assume that it is a cluster belonging to this openMCP landscape.'.

This means that the 'additional Gardener landscapes' must be unique - if you have two openMCP landscapes which both use a Gardener project named `mcpclusters` (on to different Gardener landscapes), the project can only be configured for one of the openMCP landscapes.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Inferring the MCP plugin state from another plugin's state is done in a 'best effort' style. There are only a few specific situations in which this works.
> Failing to infer the state from another plugin should never result in an error, though.


